Userspace Apps
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Abstract
---
Instead of emulating a whole computer, it is sometimes useful to just emulate
enough to make userspace apps run.  QEmu can do this and I hope ReVAX can do
the same thing at some point.

This might be faster/easier than getting enough of the VAX architecture +
peripherals implemented to run VMS, which is important for testing.

It will definitely be more convenient in many cases than having to spin up an
actual VMS (or other OS) environment and bother with file mapping and network
mapping in order for the VAX binaries to interact well with the host system.



Operating systems
---
VMS 6.x
NetBSD 1.5.3
NetBSD 2.x
OpenBSD 3.x
Ultrix 4.x
Linux 2.x

I have small binaries from all these systems.  I ultimately care most about
the ability to run VMS binaries, particularly compilers/assembler/linker and
benchmarks.

At first, it'll probably be more useful to get some of the a.out Unix binaries
up and running.  I can easily generate VAX Linux binaries at will with my cross-
compilation toolchain, so that will be really nice for testing.
[Note 2018-03-19: this is not quite true.  I can't generate executables because
I haven't built the necessary libraries.]



Basic environment
---
The bare necessities are:
 - some RAM the userspace app gets access to
 - a single process that isn't allowed to spawn/exec other processes
 - a command line
 - an environment
 - a process termination function, possibly with an exit code
 - an output function
 - an input function

Luxuries:
 - gettimeofday() or similar
 - open file, close file, write to file, read from file
 - create file
 - delete file
 - rename file

Run-time library stuff:
 - string manipulation?
 - floating-point support?
 - stack size checks?
 - malloc/free?
 - unsigned multiplication
 - unsigned division



How to run userspace apps
----
Check file format, load into (simulated) RAM, set up various tables/data areas
(with command-line, environment, stack, ...), start executing instructions.

Handle system calls, however the simulated operating system does it.



File formats
---
a.out
ELF
VMS

I already have some familiarity with the a.out and ELF formats.  I have dissected
binaries in those formats, played with linker scripts, and written code to parse
them.  The VMS format is entirely unknown to me and, frankly, a bit of a mystery.

a.out is wonderfully simple (although there are many variants of it).  There
is a tiny header and two main blocks in the file.  One block is the code, another
the date.  There can be more blocks with relocation/symbol information but they
are not complicated.  Debugging information is squeezed into the symbol table
as extra symbols.  Many variations of the a.out format exist.

ELF is not exactly simple but it's not too hard, either.  And it's well-documented
and there's plenty of code floating around that handles it in various ways.
ELF is extremely flexible and "forward-compatible" (because it is a general
container format for "sections" and relocations).

The VMS format is documented in a big book, along with other parts of VMS.
Unfortunately, there is not very much code available that can handle it.  There
isn't really any alternative sources of information on the VMS format, either.
This is probably going to be the hardest format to support.



Loader/linker
---
For all formats, basically a block read for the header, then some block reads
for the code and data.  For some, also a block read or two for the relocations
and one or two for the symbol table.

The loader itself for a.out is not likely to be more than 100 lines, including
error checks and error messages.

ELF and VMS require a linker as well, which is harder.

The loader/linker is not likely to take up much code.  I think the ELF part can be
implemented in about 3-500 lines.

The VMS loader/linker is going to be the hardest to implement (because it is
unknown territory)



System calls
---
The a.out Unix binaries are probably quite easy to implement because they are
statically linked.  All the system calls happen through CHMx instructions, I think.

The ELF Unix binaries are a lot harder.  They presume the existence of a shared
library that can be dynamically linked in by the loader, which contains the
actual system calls + various kinds of book keeping.

The VMS binaries are hard.  They presume the existence of shared libraries that
are already in memory which the binaries link to.  Those libraries implement a
lot of the operating system, do lots of book keeping, and run at different
privilege levels than the userspace apps.

The a.out binaries only require the implementation of some actual system calls.
The ELF and VMS binaries require linking some stubs in that pretend to live in
various shared libaries.  How they pass control to the simulator doesn't matter:
a magic code address, the XFC "instruction", other magic opcodes, ...

With ELF and VMS binaries, it is not actually necessary to emulate actual syscalls
(CHMx).



EVax
---
The eVAX VAX simulator seems to implement a "microkernel OS" that lets VAX
binaries run under userspace emulation instead of full host emulation.  I don't
really know, but it looks like it's an emulation of VMS.  The code is not
particularly easy to follow, not because it is ugly but because the documentation
is quite sparse.

The eVAX strategy is to implement lots of named entry points that -- somehow --
get linked to the executable at load-time.  All these named entry points are
stubs that use the XFC "instruction" to trap to the simulator.



Strategy
---
Flesh this document out as I write the code.  Particularly regarding ELF and
VMS linking -- and about the VMS executable file format.  Also about which
functions to provide stubs for.  Maybe an aside or two about at what point it
becomes easier to use an actual C runtime library, such as musl-libc.

Don't try to analyze this to death before writing code.  Grab a simple a.out
binary and -- more or less -- brute force it into working.  Then grab the next
one and make that work.  Along the way, make the code nicer when it becomes too
ugly/unflexible.

After the a.out stuff basically works, do the ELF stuff.  Do VMS last because
there is less example code and casual documentation (blog, stack overflow,
newsgroup posts, ...).

Working on the emulator was fun in the beginning, before I had much of an
architecture in my head, because there was a tight feedback loop.  Once I had
decided on an architecture and once I started doing proper testing, it became
a real drag to work on (although everything did end up really nice, clean, and
rather bug free).

I want that fun back.



References
---
eVAX -- URL + source file/line number references for loader/linker
[FIXME]


ELF
[FIXME]

John R. Levine, "Loaders and Linkers", 1st ed, 1999.


Ruth E. Goldenberg, "VAX/VMS Internals and Data Structures, version 5.2", 1991
[FIXME: link to PDF scan at Al Kossow's bitsavers]

a.out
[FIXME]


