VAX architecture
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Overview
---
A really, really nice architecture -- but too big and too complicated in some
ways.  A smaller, simpler version would have been *very* nice indeed.
Not at all the complicated monster that RISC advocates claimed -- and most of
their examples were *non-problems*.  The real problems lay somewhere else.

16 GPRs, 32-bit each.  r15 is actually the program counter so not really a
GPR at all.  Pretending that it is gives us immediates and position independent
code for free.  Same registers used for 8/16/32/64-bit integers and for 32/64-bit
floating-point values.  Some implementations even use them for 128-bit integer
and floating-point values.

Four of the GPRs have a fixed role in the VAX architecture.  One of them is
r15 (PC).  Can never be used for anything else.  The stack pointer is r14 -- a
few instructions have it hardcoded, so that's also unavailable for other
purposes.  r12 and r13 are used as argument pointer and frame pointer in the
standard calling convention.

Register starved in some circumstances, mainly with floating-point.

Flags.  4 status flags (NZVC).  Also contains various mode flags that control
execution.  Not all of them can be set/read by non-privileged code.  All the
non-prileged ones are in the lower 16 bits.

Internal Processor registers.  The first 64 processor registers are architected,
some implementations have many more (I think up to 256).  Not all of those registers
are actually assigned any purpose + some are optional.
Some registers are used for different purposes on different implementations.

Some tables in memory -- page tables + system control block (interrupt/exception
vectors) + process control block (process contexts).

4 different protection rings.  Less privileged code can't read/write data
belonging to more privileged rings.  Privilege level in PSL, page table entry.

MMU system unusual, quite different from the typical systems x86, ARM, etc.
Actually two page tables: one for process, one for system.  This gives us de
facto a two-level page table for processes + allows us to put process page
tables in virtual memory (i.e. on disk!).  Actually flat tables (arrays) instead
of trees (like everybody else).  512-byte pages.

Memory-mapped I/O -- all devices in upper physical address space, actual memory
in lower physical address space.  Firmware typically in ROM in upper physical
address space (wouldn't that make it slow?).

Block instructions.  Can be interrupted.  Restartable.

Optional PDP-11 userspace instructions.

Precise exceptions.  Well-defined + works across all implementations (not true
for 68K, for example).

Alignment.

Sequential consistency (or something very much like it).



A complete architecture
---
Everything was in there from the beginning and the instruction set/architecture
was almost never extended.

A few subsetting mechanisms were developed in order to make implementation easier/
cheaper/faster and to make the implementations themselves cheaper/smaller/faster.
They also allowed tradeoffs between speed and cost in some cases.

Some of the more esoteric original instructions turned out to be less useful
than expected + there wasn't much of a performance gain from implementing them
in microcode, so they quickly become emulated in software.  EDITPC and decimal
instructions, for example.

Other examples: the 128-bit instructions for integers (octowords) and floating-
point values (h).  They were almost never used.

It had an MMU that provided both address remapping, virtual memory, and access
protection (write protection, 4 privilege rings).

It had native support for context switches between processes.

It had native support for 5 stack pointers: one for each privilege level + one
for interrupts.

Everything was byte-addressed and addresses were always 32-bits (virtual).

The first multi-processor implementations were built only a few years after the
first single-processor machine was built and there was support in the architecture
for interlocked memory access right from the start.

The architecture was prepared for caches right from the start: normal memory
was expected to be cached but I/O memory (high addresses) was explicitly
architected to be non-cached.

The architecture had support for interlocked read-modify-write operations right
from the start (including ADAWI that was specified to even work in I/O space)
so even if multi-processors weren't available yet, it would work with certain
I/O devices that read/wrote main memory.

The cache system was I/O coherent right from the start.

There was an architected way to perform self-modifying code (including in the
form of program load), namely by executing the REI instruction.

There was even an architected way to see which VAX implementation the software
was running on!

Precise exceptions.  S/360 got this wrong in some early implementations.  I
think some of the RISC architectures also got it wrong.

Exception handling uniform across implementations.  They varied a lot across
the 68K family, for example.



Avoided ugly transitions of RISC architectures, x86, 68K
---
x86 and 68K had no MMU originally.  68K could interface with an external MMU
but it originally couldn't restart faulting memory instructions properly!
Some vendors worked around this by using two 68K CPUs with one running slightly
ahead of the other.  When the first faulted the other one was interrupt *before*
it executed the faulting instruction.  That allowed virtual memory to be
implemented correctly.

x86 added first segmentation (286) and then paging (386).  It took from 8086 in
1978 to 80386 in 1985 before it had paging and nice virtual memory.

x86 and 68K both had integer mul/div from the start (slow, multicycle instructions).
MIPS, SPARC, HP-PA didn't.  Problematic to speed up existing binaries on new
CPUs *with* integer mul/div.

Likewise with fp -- x86 didn't quite fp from the start but almost.  8087 not
super well integrated into the architecture.  Asynch.  Needed explicit FWAIT
instructions for synchronization.  Needed FSTSW to store 8087 flags into memory
and then load it into AX and then execute LAHF to move them into the native flags
so a conditional branch can be executed.  Really, really cumbersome.





Flags
---
NZVC

Would be nice if either ALL NZVC flags were set or NONE.  Unfortunately, some
instructions set *some* flags.  Would also be nice if flags were set entirely
on the basis of ALU operations -- but we can't do that, either.

Integer overflow.
Other trap possibilities.

Bits in the high 16 bits of PSL.  Privilege level, trap (single-step), ...



Too many native datatypes, instructions, and addressing modes
---
queues, bitfields, packed decimal, EDITPC, too many block operations

Bitfields and queues are easier to implement in microcode (and to make fast)
than they look at first glance so they were always implemented in microcode (or
hardware for the bitfields).

The others turned out to be cheap enough to emulate in firmware (written in VAX
machine code).

The addressing modes are (mostly) a natural superset of the PDP-11 addressing
modes... but it was a step too far.  Inc/dec modes were less useful than expected
and harder to make fast than expected.  They were also far more widespread in
assembly and compiled code than was nice -- so hard to move the architecture
away from.

CALLS/CALLG/RET, use a register mask before the call target!  Pushes it to the
stack, RET uses it to restore registers (and a flag bit).  This was probably a
mistake.  I can understand why they did it: the PDP-11 used far too many different
calling conventions.  Complicated, hard to make fast.

JSB/RSB are much more sensible call/ret instructions, used internally in VAX
code.  CALLS/CALLG/RET only expected to be used at external interfaces.



32-bit, byte-oriented, microcoded, sequential interpretation
---
The VAX was designed from the beginning to be implemented with a full 32-bit
datapath, with microcode that interpreted the instructions one byte at a time.
The instruction encoding is very byte-oriented: each instruction begins with
an opcode (one byte, unless the first byte is FD, in which case it is two bytes)
and a sequence of 0 to 6 operands.  Each operand starts with an operand descriptor
(one byte) and possibly an extra operand descriptor (also one byte) and one to
eight bytes for an immediate value.

You don't know how long the instruction is until the last operand specifier
has been decoded.  You don't know where any of the operand specifiers are (except
for the first) until after you have decoded all the previous operand specifiers.
The VAX instruction set is *very* sequential.  The Japanese company NEC made
an architecture in the 80's with 3 members (V60/V70/V80) that was very VAX-like.
The major change they had made was to put all the operand specifiers right next
to the opcode, thus making it much easier/faster to decode.  This also freed
them from having to fit a register number and an address mode into a single byte,
thereby allowing them to have 32 GPRs instead of just 16.  Their architecture
also uses 2-address instructions (like the x86) much more than the VAX does.

The actual operands can be in memory, pointed at by registers.  Those registers
can potentially be incremented or decremented as part of the operand interpretation.

So what happens if several operands want to increment/decrement the same
register?  Or if a register is used as source for a bit field and the same
register is then used in a increment/decrement addressing mode afterwards?

In all cases, the correct behaviour is to do what is the simplest and obvious
implementation on a microcoded machine that interprets the operands one byte
at a time.

There are a few instructions that operate on entities larger than 32 bits.
Those are mainly 64-bit integers (quadwords) and 64-bit floating-point values
(there are two kinds: d and g).  A few implementations also have native support
for 128-bit integers (octowords) and 128-bit floating-point values (h).

These instructions are carefully chosen so as not to be too difficult to implement
with a 32-bit datapath.

Shorter integers than 32-bit are also possible: 8 (byte) and 16 bits (word).
ALU and MOV operations on those smaller entities only write 1 or 2 bytes to
destination registers and leave the upper bytes untouched.  Flags are set based
on the 8 or 16 bits of the operation, not based on the upper bits.

The obvious implementation is to always use 32-bit reads from the register
file (and allow two simultaneous reads) but to send the data width (8/16/32)
to the ALU together with the 2 32-bit input busses and the operation specifier,
and to send the data width (8/16/32) to the register file's write port together
with the register number and the result value (on a 32-bit bus).

The datapath on all machines supported a 64-bit shift/rotate operation natively,
in order to support ASHQ (arithmetic shift quad) and the CMPV/CMPZV, EXTV/EXTVZ,
FFS/FFC, INSV bitfield operations.  Granted, it was only a cheap one-bit-at-a-
time shift register at first.  The later models got a full barrel shifter.



Integrated floating-point
---
Floating-point operations were fully integrated into the architecture -- they
set the same flags as integer operations, for example -- but implementations
were made that could operate both with hardware floating-point and with emulation
in microcode or software(?).  The application software never had to know, which
is very different from the 68K, x86, various RISCs.

Floating-point values in GPRs.  Nice in some ways, problematic in others.
Double-precision code is register starved because each value takes two GPRs +
GPRs are needed for indices and pointers and there are only 12 GPRs available
to the code.

The floating-point format isn't IEEE -- because that wasn't invented yet.
It looks a lot like a simpler version of IEEE, because that's what it is.
IEEE took the many good ideas of VAX floating-point and added a few more: INF,
NaN, and denormalized values.

VAX floating-point originates with PDP-11 floating-point from 1970 (which
defined the f and d formats for 32-bit and 64-bit respectively).  The VAX almost
immediately gained another 64-bit format (g) because the original one from the
PDP-11 couldn't handle numbers very far from 0 or very close to it -- the
first word of both the PDP-11 formats were identical.  The new 64-bit format
allocated more bits to the exponent to solve the issue.

VAX floating-point can take the value "reserved operand" on top of the normal
values.  Any attempt to operate on such a value -- even just an innocent MOV --
will cause an exception.

The only floating-point instructions are MOV, MNEG, ADD/SUB/MUL/DIV/CMP/TST,
CVT, ACB, EMOD, and POLY.  MOV is a move instruction that tests for the "reserved
operand" value, MNEG flips the sign, TST is CMP with 0.0, CVT converts between
floating-point formats and between integers and floating-point.
ACB is "add-compare-branch" for loop constructs with floating-point.

EMOD and POLY are both used to implement other floating-point functions such as
sin/cos/tan and exp.

EMOD does range reduction by multiplying a floating-point number with an extra
8 bits of precision with another floating-point number and splitting the result
into an integer (signed 32-bit) and a fractional part (floating-point).

POLY calculates a the value of a multi-term polynomial (used to approximate
various functions) with an internal high-precision intermediary sum.  So,
basically an automated floating-point FMAC operation.

The much-maligned POLY isn't actually particularly complicated to implement,
especially not at a time when almost all floating-point was microcoded, anyway.



Vectors, a late and misguided extension
---
In the mid-80's, many people thought that the road to really fast number
crunching required vectors.  They started working on it midway through the
development of RIGEL (around 1985/1986), which was shipped in 1986.
In the end, only RIGEL and VAX 9000 ever supported vectors.
MARIAH and NVAX didn't.

Vectors did give (up to) twice as good benchmark numbers for number crunching
tests on VAX 9000 but it did complicate everything and wasn't useful at all to
normal floating-point code.

DEC managed to develop software that could emulate vector instructions on other
machines.  It was slow, but it worked.  Very nice for software that only occasionally
used the vector instructions.

The main *actual* benefit of the vector extension probably was to provide more
floating-point registers.

A different extension that would probably have worked better would be to have
an extra set of floating-point registers that could be addressed with its own
set of MOV/ADD/SUB/MUL/DIV/CMP/TST instructions + a version of MOV that could
move values between the GPRs and floating-point registers.  It would only need
to support the 'f' and 'g' formats, not the old 'd' format.  Support for single/
double precision IEEE could be added later.

CVT, ACB, EMOD, POLY would not be necessary.  Conversions (rare) could be done
in the GPRs, ACB could also use a GPR (and I expect it to be rare), EMOD and
POLY are used in functions that only handle a few floating-point values at a
time, so they can also just use the GPRs.

I don't know whether these "FPRs" should be 32-bit (and use pairs like normal
VAX floating-point for 64-bit values), or be natural 64-bit registers.  The
former would fit in more naturally with the rest of the architecture (and be
cheaper) but the latter would probably work better.

Even if only the first 8 FPRs were available on the first implementations, it
would probably work great.



Interrupts, exceptions
---
Prioritized.  Masking, status, prioritization built into the architecture (that
was probably not necessary).

Needs both PSL (privileged and non-privileged parts) + several Internal Processor
Registers + the vectors in the System Control Blocks.

There are too many different kinds of traps/exceptions.

Software interrupts that are *asynchronous*.  VMS can't work without them, used
for ASRs (asynchronous response routines) that are used all over the operating
system.




Virtual memory
---
512 bytes.  P0, P1, S0.  Flat tables w/ len.  No S1.
Various pte formats.  Up to 34-bit phys addr by the end.
privilege levels, R/W/X checks.

translation can be turned off.

Internal things like system control block, process control block, S0 lookup use
untranslated addresses, always.

Access into the P0/P1 tables use S0 translation.




Privilege levels
---
0/1/2/3

KSP/../USP.

Current privilege level in PSL (?)
Each pte has an access mode: privilege + R/W/X.

CHMx to switch mode, REI to switch back.  CHMx (and REI?) only allowed in S0.
User applications called system code with CALLS/CALLG instructions to entry
points in S0 region which would then execute a CHMx instruction.



Instruction set, overview
---
<opcode> [operand]{0..6}

almost all operands are general, have an opspec.

branches only exception.

optype, access type, data type: ab, aw, al, aq, rb/rw/rl/rq/rf/rd/rg, ...

6-bit immediates
Rn
[Rn], [--Rn], [Rn++], ...
long immediates: b/w/l/q/f/d/g  (and o/h)

bb, bw

bitfields, vb

implied operands

many memory references possible per instruction -- some have claimed that makes
it difficult to implement (and difficult to write systems software for). I disagree.
It doesn't seem particularly hard, actually.


Three-address version of ADD, reads two (byte) values and writes their (byte) sum:

  ADDB3   rb, rb, wb
  ADDB3   src1.rb, src2.rb, dst.wb

Two-address version of ADD, shows a "modify" operand at the end:

  ADDB2   rb, mb
  ADDB2   src.rb, sum.mb

Implied operands:

  EXTV    pos.rl, len.rb, base.vb, {field.r}, dst.wl

  Extracts bits from a bitfield that begins at address base, starts pos bits
  into the bitfield and is len bits wide.  The extracted bits are written to
  dst.

All write and modify operands are always at the end of the operand list.



Instructions themselves
---
Prefixes
XFC
breakpoint
reserved bytes
"defined undefined" opcodes -- x86 has something similar.



Operands
---



Registers
---
PSL, 4-bit flags

16 GPRs

PC (r15), operands specifically spec'ed so that operand decoding can be implemented
sequentially (one byte at a time) and in parallel (and/or several bytes at a time).

Also spec'ed so that the PC can never be written to with normal instructions --
only interrupts/exceptions and explicit control transfer instructions can write
to the PC.

Also spec'ed so that the only way normal instructions can read the PC is indirectly,
in the form of PC relative addressing, which gives us immediates (8F), addresses
(9F), and byte/word/long relative and byte/word/long relative deferred.

The decoder might as well do the addition of the PC and displacement for the
relative addressing modes (possibly combined with deferred and indexed).



Buses
---
Unibus, PDP-11 compatibility, 1969
Q22, PDP-11 (LSI-11), year?
Massbus, PDP-10, PDP-11, 1970's
VAXBI, VAX 6000/8000/9000
XMI
TURBOchannel

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unibus
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Q-Bus
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Massbus
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/VAXBI_Bus
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/TURBOchannel


bus transaction, DMA (devices can write to/from memory), interlocked
I/O coherent caches

unaligned reads/writes  (uncached, that is, in I/O space)
aligned reads/writes -- byte lanes

interlocked access, 8/16/32 bits, aligned, interlocking grain
  ADAWI 			rmw, 2 bytes, aligned
  BBCCI/BBSSI 			rmw, 1 byte
  INSQHI/INSQTI/REMQHI/REMQTI	rmw, 4 bytes, aligned (more than one word?)


block transfers
interrupted transfers?  max legal transfer length?

interrupts

synchronous bus (so interrupts can use simple wires, don't have to use packets
as in modern PCI).

CVAX had a nice bus, defined around 1987.

8-bit I/O read
8-bit I/O write
16-bit I/O read
16-bit I/O write
32-bit I/O read
32-bit I/O write
64-bit I/O read
64-bit I/O write

MOVQ, MOVD/MOVG, ASHQ, ADDD/SUBD/MULD/DIVD, ADDG/SUBG/MULG/DIVG


Devices
---
Autoconfiguration?



Dark corners
---

CMPV/CMPZV, EXTV/EXTZV, FFS/FFC

the field is extracted as soon as the (pos,size,basereg) triple is know, before
the last operand is handled.  This matters if the last operand uses an autoinc/
dec addressing mode using the same register as one of the registers the field
is in.
Extracting the field afterwards would then extract the wrong bit pattern.

Earlier VAX implementations naturally did the right thing, but the CVAX doesn't
because it handles all operands before the instruction itself is handled.
Therefore the microcode for these instructions start with compensation code
for this case.

	CMPV #0, #32, R0, (R0)+
	CMPZV #0, #32, R0, (R0)+
	EXTV #0, #32, R0, (R0)+
	EXTZV #0, #32, R0, (R0)+
	FFS #0, #32, R0, (R0)+
	FFC #0, #32, R0, (R0)+


EDIV

Has a similar problem with inc/dec address mode as CMPV/CMPZ/EXTV/EXTZV/FFS/FFC.
(depending on how the implementation handles it -- see the Raven microcode)



CMPV/CMPZV, EXTV/EXTZV, FFS/FFC, INSV

What happens if the field is in a register?  If it spills over to the next
register AND that register is r15, you get an exception.  But what if it is
completely contained within the first register and that register is r14?

This is "unpredictable".  The ARM doesn't say so but the CVAX specification does.

The ts10 emulator raises an exception if the field is in r15 or spills over into
r15.

SimH does the same.  I think the CVAX microarchitecture does the same if the
microcode attempts to read r15 as if it were a normal register -- which result
in identical behaviour to ts10 and SimH.



CMPV/CMPZV, EXTV/EXTZV, FFS/FFC

They are not allowed to take bit fields from short (6-bit) immediates.  They
are apparently allowed to take bit fields from long immediates.  But what if
that immediate is too short to contain the field?  Does it get automatically
zero extended somehow?  I think this is a case the VAX designers/implementers
missed.  I have found no reference to it in the CVAX specification document or
in the architectural reference manual.

I think it *ought* to be "unpredictable" and I think most implementations
blissfully pretend immediates were just normal bitfields in memory that just
happened to be embedded inside instructions.  I believe most of them would
read data outside the immediate fields, other parts of the instruction or even
other instructions.


INSV

Can it write a field to a long immediate?  Can it *overflow* the long immediate?

This is not a case that I've seen mentioned in the ARM, the CVAX specification,
or the CVAX microcode.

I think it ought to be "unpredictable".  I also think most implementations would
blissfully write to the immediate field -- or to later bytes, thus overwriting
other instructions -- as if the immediate field was just a normal bitfield in
memory.



MOVQ

It moves a 64-bit entity on a 32-bit machine and sets the Z flag based on the
entire value.  Breaking the move into 2 32-bit moves is not hard but one has to
be careful to set the Z flag based on BOTH 32-bit parts.

There might also be tricky case when moving from one register pair to another
if they overlap a bit:

  MOVQ  r0, r1		; (r1,r0) --> (r2,r1)

If it is implemented naïvely with a 32-bit datapath it would be:

  µmov  r0, r1		; oops!  overwrites r1
  µmov  r1, r2		; now r2 = r1 = r0!

In practice, there is normally no problem because normal VAX implementations
execute MOVQ in the following three phases:
 1) microcode decodes the first operand (r0) and copies r0 and r1 into internal
    registers
 2) microcode decodes the second operand (r1) and decides it doesn't need to
    do anything since it is not an address operand
 3) microcode copies the two internal registers to two other internal registers
 4) microcode decodes the second operand again and copies the values in the
    last two internal registers over to r1 and r2

The NVAX is somewhat different, because steps 1, 2, and 4 are performed by
hardware and not microcde.  Step 3 is pretty much the same, though.

If I ever write a VAX implementation that has a smart decoder which recognizes
immediate and register operands and skips microcode for them, then I will have
to be careful to avoid this trap.

In that case, it can be solved by:
 - using temporary registers and extra µops
 - decoding to two different 2-µop sequences, depending on the overlap:
    MOVQ  r0, r1	; (r1,r0) --> (r2,r1)

    µmov  r1, r2	; r1 is now free to be overwritten (most significant first)
    µmov  r0, r1	; correct!


    MOVQ  r1, r0	; (r2,r1) --> (r1,r0)

    µmov  r1, r0	; r1 is now free to be overwritten (least significant first)
    µmov  r2, r1	; correct!
 - using a 64-bit datapath




ASHQ

Setting flags, especially the Z flag...


Addressing modes
ab/aw/al/aq apparently accept (long) immediate operands!


Bit fields
Bit field operands are (mostly) address operands in disguise.  That means that
they also accept (long) immediate operands!


On some VAX machines, even modify (mb/mw/ml/mq/...) and write (wb/ww/wl/wq/...)
work with immediate operands!  Yes, that will modify the immediate field so if
the instruction is run in a loop it will be different the next time around!

This is, thankfully, not a requirement of the architecture.  It is officially
"unpredictable" what happens if you use a (long) immediate as a modify or write
operand.

It ought to be "unpredictable" as well if done with the INSV instruction (that
writes a value to a bitfield) but it isn't documented as such.



POLY

Many VAX implementations got these instructions wrong -- in different ways.
DEC "fixed" this by amending the specifications and by coding around it with
clever code in the math libraries.



Literature
---
https://esolangs.org/wiki/User:Ian/Computer_architectures

"Ian" has lots of interesting observations but there are many minor inaccuracies.



https://0xabad1dea.github.io/vaxhax-0xabad1dea.txt

CVAX microcode

SimH

ts10



VAX ARM, 1977

VAX std32, Jan 1990


CVAX Specification -- cvaxspec.txt

CVAX Design -- cvaxdesign.txt

CVAX CPU Chip Microcode Documentation -- cvaxudoc.txt

VAX Processor Charts, vax_proc.txt, 2000


